A **Constable** type is one whose values are constants that can be represented in the constant pool of a Java classfile, and whose instances can describe themselves as a **ConstantDesc**.

**ConstantDesc** is a description of a constant value (or a descriptor for a loadable constant value). Such a description is the *nominal form* of the constant value; it is not the value itself, but rather a "recipe" for describing the value, storing the value in a constant pool entry, or reconstituting the value from a class loading context. Every *ConstantDesc* knows how to resolve itself - compute the value that it describes - via *resolveConstantDesc()* method. The resolution and access control context in this method is provided by the [[MethodHandle#Lookup]] parameter.

The *nominal form* of an instance of a constable type (ConstantDesc) is obtained via *describeConstable()* method of the Constable. A Constable is not obliged to describe all its instances in the form of a ConstantDesc; this method returns an Optional that can be empty to indicate that a nominal descriptor can not be created for an instance.

Some constable types have a native representation in the constant pool: String, Integer, Long, Float, and Double implement **ConstantDesc** and serve as nominal descriptors for themselves. Native linkable constants (Class, MethodType, and [[MethodHandle]]) have corresponding nominal descriptors ClassDesc, MethodTypeDesc, and MethodHandleDesc respectively. Other reference type constants (such as [[Enum]] or [[VarHandle]]) are represented by subtypes of **DynamicConstantDesc**, which describes dynamically generated constants.

Class names in a nominal descriptor, like class names in the constant pool of a classfile, must be interpreted with respect to a particular class loader, which is not part of the nominal descriptor.
